.. _acknowledgements:

****************
Acknowledgments
****************

Many researchers in the glaciology and climate modeling communities have
contributed to this work. Development of the CESM land-ice component is
overseen by the Land Ice Working Group, which has been co-chaired since
2009 by William Lipscomb (LANL) and Jesse Johnson (U. Montana), with
Stephen Price (LANL) serving as scientific liaison. Since 2011, William
Sacks has served as LIWG software liaison; he is responsible for many
ice-sheet model improvements since the initial CESM release in 2010. Jon
Wolfe (NCAR) was the lead software engineer for the initial
implementation of ice sheets in CESM. Tony Craig, Erik Kluzek, David
Lawrence, and Mariana Vertenstein (NCAR) have supported overall software
development, including the incorporation of ice sheets in CLM. Jeremy
Fyke (LANL) and Miren Vizcaíno (Utrecht University) have worked closely
on the analysis of output from the surface-mass-balance scheme and
dynamic ice sheet model within CESM.

Development of Glimmer-CISM has been overseen by a steering committee
consisting of Magnus Hagdorn (U. Edinburgh), Tony Payne (U. Bristol),
and Ian Rutt (U. Swansea) in the U.K., along with Johnson, Lipscomb, and
Price. They and many others have contributed to the dynamic ice sheet
model. Participants in the DOE Ice Sheet Initiative for Climate Extremes
(ISICLES) project and the new Predicting Ice Sheet and Climate Evolution
at Extreme Scales (PISCEES) project are responsible for many model
improvements that will be included in upcoming Glimmer-CISM releases.
William Collins (LBNL) has led the Investigation of the Magnitudes and
Probabilities of Abrupt Climate Transitions (IMPACTS) project, which is
developing new ice-ocean coupling methods that will be incorporated in
future versions of CESM.

Several DOE and NSF program managers, including Anjuli Bamzai, Lali
Chatterjee, Lisa Clough, Jay Fein, Renu Joseph, Dorothy Koch, Randall
Laviolette, and Julie Palais (NSF), have provided essential support for
ice sheet model development and integration into CESM. Phil Jones has
supported this work as manager of LANL’s COSIM project and as PI of the
DOE SciDAC projects that have funded much of this effort. William
Collins, Peter Gent, James Hurrell, and Marika Holland have supported
this project while managing overall CCSM/CESM development at NCAR.

Many others have actively participated in the Land Ice Working Group and
have given advice and encouragement along the way.

